important role in climate change mitigation. Globally, different initiatives are under development to reward activities that enhance climate change mitigation both in compliance (Kyoto Protocol inclined) with Clean Development Mechanisms, specifically afforestation and reforestation in the forest sector, and in voluntary mechanisms like Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD). Linking gum and resin operations to these initiatives will form a platform where additional benefits can be obtained, mainly through generation of carbon credit, boosting the income levels of the households or communities. Development of the gums and resins sector also needs to inculcate certification of the products. Putting in place certification procedures and standards will give the sector due consideration by external buyers, especially in the developed world, who are keen on knowing the origin, safety standard and risks/ impacts on the natural environment the product has generated during its production. Kenya, and by extension Africa, can harness competitive advantages in the gums and resins trade due to sourcing of materials from pure and unpolluted sources, low cost of production, and positive scores on ethical trade due to participation of women in collection and their empowerment through income generated. After assuming power the National Rainbow Coalition (2003–2007) and Coalition government (2007–2012) had shown interest in developing northern Kenya and other marginalised dryland areas in Kenya. The Government of Kenya has established the Ministry of State for Development of Northern Kenya and Other Arid Lands to facilitate development in the previously marginalised areas to bridge the gap and bring them to the same level in terms of infrastructural and human development with the rest of the regions. Gum and resin collection as a livelihood enhancement strategy, and its further development, is in accordance with the government’s intentions in setting up such a ministry and other policy goals that aim to develop arid lands in Kenya. However, there is currently no policy in place that is directed toward developing the gums and resins sector in northern Kenya. The only instrument that touches on non-wood forest products is the Forest Policy of 2005, although it does not elaborate on mechanisms that need to be put in place to promote the sector. Furthermore, proper and effective implementation of previous policies in the drylands of Kenya is wanting. There is also a highly likelihood that the new Ministry will be axed in the coming years, which will serve as a disincentive to struggling sectors in the region like gums and resins. The gums and resins sector currently contributes to the economy at the individual, household, community and even national level and has inherent potential to contribute more at all of these levels. For the sector to effectively contribute to the livelihoods of northern Kenya and the country’s economy at large, a number of interventions are required to enhance its development. Capacity building of the local communities is of paramount importance. Sensitizing the communities on the economic importance of the gums and resins needs to be given due consideration. Currently there is disparity in the level of engagement in the gums and resins trade among different communities in northern Kenya. Somali communities are more active and well informed about the economic benefits of gums and resins than their Borana counterparts. This sentiment was expressed by many traders interviewed in Garba Tula area in the current study. The quantity of gums and resins harvested in northern Kenya is currently below their potential. The communities are not knowledgeable on tapping methods that can result in better yield. In most cases tapping is rarely practised, and in areas where the practice is exercised it is not done in the most efficient way. Moreover, the communities are ill-equipped in terms of the accessories used in collecting and transporting the gums and resins. Collection of gums and resins also has detrimental effects on collectors’ skin, hence provision of gloves and other protective equipment is required. The market for gums and resins in northern Kenya is currently not well developed. The collectors have little ability or knowledge to seek new markets, specifically wider national and international markets. It is unlikely that the trade will be able to grow and blossom without at least some external intervention. Measures to develop the market structure need to be explored and implemented in order to realise the full benefit of trading in gums and resins. Areas that require special attention include exploring ways of breaking the cartel culture in the sector, and of disseminating information on price trends and demands for the gums and resins locally and internationally. Closely related to marketing is the putting in place of infrastructure such as roads, harvesting and transportation materials and storage facilities required to facilitate the enhancement of the gums and resin sector. Informal sectors, especially in the rural setup, do not have access to credit facilities which are an essential component for business expansion. Promotion of microenterprise through financing, value addition and putting in place of certification measures are also required. All of these aspects are pegged to the policy process in the northern Kenya, hence putting in place gums and resins policy will help in facilitating and speedy implementation of interventions that will accelerate the development of the gum and resin sector in northern Kenya. Community members who are involved in collection of the gums and resins, and those willing to take up the practice, are normally faced with financial difficulties in buying sustenance and necessary equipment; therefore, advancing finances to fund operation of the collectors will be helpful in developing the sector. There is a dearth of knowledge in the gums and resins sector due to inadequate research. Gachathi and Ericksen 2011; Chikamai and Gachathi 1994; Chikamai 2002; and Chikamai and Odera 2002 are a few studies undertaken in the country. Up-scaling of the research activities in the sector is required to assess resource availability, identify issues that affect productivity and proper functioning, 